.. _installation:

######################
Installing Singularity
######################

This section will guide you through the process of installing
Singularity {InstallationVersion} via several different methods. (For
instructions on installing earlier versions of Singularity please see
`earlier versions of the docs <https://www.sylabs.io/docs/>`_.)

=====================
Installation on Linux
=====================

Singularity can be installed on any modern Linux distribution, on
bare-metal or inside a Virtual Machine. Nested installations inside
containers are not recommended, and require the outer container to be
run with full privilege.

-------------------
System Requirements
-------------------

Singularity requires ~140MiB disk space once compiled and installed.

There are no specific CPU or memory requirements at runtime, though
2GB of RAM is recommended when building from source.

Full functionality of Singularity requires that the kernel supports:

 - **OverlayFS mounts** - (minimum kernel >=3.18) Required for full
   flexiblity in bind mounts to containers, and to support persistent
   overlays for writable containers.
 - **Unprivileged user namespaces** - (minimum kernel >=3.8, >=3.18
   recommended) Required to run containers without root or setuid
   privilege.

RHEL & CentOS 6 do not support these features, but Singularity can be
used with some limitations.


Filesystem support / limitations
================================

Singularity supports most filesystems, but there are some limitations
when installing Singularity on, or running containers from, common
parallel / network filesystems. In general:

 - We strongly recommend installing Singularity on local disk on each
   compute node.
 - If Singularity is installed to a network location, a
   ``--localstatedir`` should be provided on each node, and Singularity
   configured to use it.
 - The ``--localstatedir`` filesystem should support overlay mounts.
 - ``TMPDIR`` / ``SINGULARITY_TMPDIR`` should be on a local filesystem
   wherever possible.

.. note::

   Set the ``--localstatedir`` location by by providing
   ``--localstatedir my/dir`` as an option when you configure your
   Singularity build with ``./mconfig``.

   Disk usage at the ``--localstatedir`` location is neglible
   (<1MiB). The directory is used as a location to mount the container
   root filesystem, overlays, bind mounts etc. that construct the
   runtime view of a container. You will not see these mounts from a
   host shell, as they are made in a separate mount namespace.

 
Overlay support
---------------
   
Various features of Singularity, such as the ``--writable-tmpfs`` and
``--overlay``, options use the Linux ``overlay`` filesystem driver to
construct a container root filesystem that combines files from
different locations. Not all filesystems can be used with the
``overlay`` driver, so when containers are run from these filesystems
some Singularity features may not be available.

Overlay support has two aspects:

  - ``lowerdir`` support for a filesystem allows a directory on that
    filesystem to act as the 'base' of a container. A filesystem must
    support overlay ``lowerdir`` for you be able to run a Singularity
    sandbox container on it, while using functionality such as
    ``--writable-tmpfs`` / ``--overlay``.
  - ``upperdir`` support for a filesystem allows a directory on that
    filesystem to be merged on top of a ``lowerdir`` to construct a
    container. If you use the ``--overlay`` option to overlay a
    directory onto a container, then the filesystem holding the
    overlay directory must support ``upperdir``.

Note that any overlay limitations mainly apply to sandbox (directory)
containers only. A SIF container is mounted into the
``--localstatedir`` location, which should generally be on a local
filesystem that supports overlay.


Fakeroot / (sub)uid/gid mapping
-------------------------------

When Singularity is run using the :ref:`fakeroot <fakeroot>` option it
creates a user namespace for the container, and UIDs / GIDs in that
user namepace are mapped to different host UID / GIDs.

Most local filesystems (ext4/xfs etc.) support this uid/gid mapping in
a user namespace.

Most network filesystems (NFS/Lustre/GPFS etc.) *do not* support this
uid/gid mapping in a user namespace. Because the fileserver is not
aware of the mappings it will deny many operations, with 'permission
denied' errors. This is currently a generic problem for rootless
container runtimes.

Singularity cache / atomic rename
---------------------------------

Singularity will cache SIF container images generated from remote
sources, and any OCI/docker layers used to create them. The cache is
created at ``$HOME/.singularity/cache`` by default. The location of
the cache can be changed by setting the ``SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR``
environment variable.

The directory used for ``SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR`` should be:

 - A unique location for each user. Permissions are set on the cache
   so that private images cached for one user are not exposed to
   another. This means that ``SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR`` cannot be shared.
 - Located on a filesystem with sufficient space for the number and size of
   container images anticipated.
 - Located on a filesystem that supports atomic rename, if possible.

In Singularity version 3.6 and above the cache is concurrency safe.
Parallel runs of Singularity that would create overlapping cache
entries will not conflict, as long as the filesystem used by
``SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR`` supports atomic rename operations.

Support for atomic rename operations is expected on local POSIX
filesystems, but varies for network / parallel filesystems and may be
affected by topology and configuration. For example, Lustre supports
atomic rename of files only on a single MDT. Rename on NFS is only
atomic to a single client, not across systems accessing the same NFS
share.

If you are not certain that your ``$HOME`` or ``SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR``
filesytems support atomic rename, do not run Singularity in parallel
using remote container URLs. Instead use ``singularity pull`` to
create a local SIF image, and then run this SIF image in a parallel
step. An alternative is to use the ``--disable-cache`` option, but
this will result in each Singularity instance independently fetching
the container from the remote source, into a temporary location.


NFS
---

NFS filesystems support overlay mounts as a ``lowerdir`` only, and do not
support user-namespace (sub)uid/gid mapping.

 - Containers run from SIF files located on an NFS filesystem do not
   have restrictions.
 - You cannot use ``--overlay mynfsdir/`` to overlay a directory onto
   a container when the overlay (upperdir) directory is on an NFS
   filesystem.
 - When using ``--fakeroot`` to build or run a container, your
   ``TMPDIR`` / ``SINGULARITY_TMPDIR`` should not be set to an NFS
   location.
 - You should not run a sandbox container with ``--fakeroot`` from an
   NFS location.

Lustre / GPFS
-------------

Lustre and GPFS do not have sufficient ``upperdir`` or ``lowerdir``
overlay support for certain Singularity features, and do not support
user-namespace (sub)uid/gid mapping.

  - You cannot use ``-overlay`` or ``--writable-tmpfs`` with a sandbox
    container that is located on a Lustre or GPFS filesystem. SIF
    containers on Lustre / GPFS will work correctly with these
    options.
  - You cannot use ``--overlay`` to overlay a directory onto a
    container, when the overlay (upperdir) directory is on a Lustre or
    GPFS filesystem.
  - When using ``--fakeroot`` to build or run a container, your
    ``TMPDIR/SINGULARITY_TMPDIR`` should not be a Lustre or GPFS
    location.
  - You should not run a sandbox container with ``--fakeroot`` from a
    Lustre or GPFS location.

----------------
Before you begin
----------------

If you have an earlier version of Singularity installed, you should
:ref:`remove it <remove-an-old-version>` before executing the
installation commands.  You will also need to install some
dependencies and install `Go <https://golang.org/>`_.

.. _install-dependencies:

-------------------
Install from Source
-------------------

To use the latest version of Singularity from GitHub you will need to
build and install it from source. This may sound daunting, but the
process is straightforward, and detailed below:


Install Dependencies
====================

On Red Hat Enterprise Linux or CentOS install the following dependencies:

.. code-block:: sh

   $ sudo yum update -y && \
        sudo yum groupinstall -y 'Development Tools' && \
        sudo yum install -y \
        openssl-devel \
        libuuid-devel \
        libseccomp-devel \
        wget \
        squashfs-tools \
        cryptsetup

        
On Ubuntu or Debian install the following dependencies:

.. code-block:: sh

    $ sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install -y \
        build-essential \
        uuid-dev \
        libgpgme-dev \
        squashfs-tools \
        libseccomp-dev \
        wget \
        pkg-config \
        git \
        cryptsetup-bin

.. note::

   You can build Singularity (3.5+) without ``cryptsetup`` available, but will
   not be able to use encrypted containers without it installed on your system.

.. _install-go:

Install Go
==========

Singularity v3 is written primarily in Go, and you will need Go 1.13
or above installed to compile it from source.

This is one of several ways to `install and configure Go
<https://golang.org/doc/install>`_.

.. note::

   If you have previously installed Go from a download, rather than an
   operating system package, you should remove your ``go`` directory,
   e.g. ``rm -r /usr/local/go`` before installing a newer
   version. Extracting a new version of Go over an existing
   installation can lead to errors when building Go programs, as it
   may leave old files, which have been removed or replaced in newer
   versions.


Visit the `Go download page <https://golang.org/dl/>`_ and pick a package
archive to download. Copy the link address and download with wget.  Then extract
the archive to ``/usr/local`` (or use other instructions on go installation
page).

.. code-block:: none

    $ export VERSION=1.14.12 OS=linux ARCH=amd64 && \
        wget https://dl.google.com/go/go$VERSION.$OS-$ARCH.tar.gz && \
        sudo tar -C /usr/local -xzvf go$VERSION.$OS-$ARCH.tar.gz && \
        rm go$VERSION.$OS-$ARCH.tar.gz

Then, set up your environment for Go.

.. code-block:: none

    $ echo 'export GOPATH=${HOME}/go' >> ~/.bashrc && \
        echo 'export PATH=/usr/local/go/bin:${PATH}:${GOPATH}/bin' >> ~/.bashrc && \
        source ~/.bashrc

Download Singularity from a release
===================================

You can download Singularity from one of the releases. To see a full
list, visit `the GitHub release page
<https://github.com/hpcng/singularity/releases>`_.  After deciding on
a release to install, you can run the following commands to proceed
with the installation.

.. code-block:: none

    $ export VERSION={InstallationVersion} && # adjust this as necessary \
        wget https://github.com/hpcng/singularity/releases/download/v${VERSION}/singularity-${VERSION}.tar.gz && \
        tar -xzf singularity-${VERSION}.tar.gz && \
        cd singularity

Checkout Code from Git
======================

The following commands will install Singularity from the `GitHub repo
<https://github.com/hpcng/singularity>`_ to ``/usr/local``. This
method will work for >=v{InstallationVersion}. To install an older
tagged release see `older versions of the docs
<https://www.sylabs.io/docs/>`_.

When installing from source, you can decide to install from either a
**tag**, a **release branch**, or from the **master branch**.

- **tag**: GitHub tags form the basis for releases, so installing from
  a tag is the same as downloading and installing a `specific release
  <https://github.com/hpcng/singularity/releases>`_.  Tags are
  expected to be relatively stable and well-tested.

- **release branch**: A release branch represents the latest version
  of a minor release with all the newest bug fixes and enhancements
  (even those that have not yet made it into a point release).  For
  instance, to install v3.2 with the latest bug fixes and enhancements
  checkout ``release-3.2``.  Release branches may be less stable than
  code in a tagged point release.

- **master branch**: The ``master`` branch contains the latest,
  bleeding edge version of Singularity. This is the default branch
  when you clone the source code, so you don't have to check out any
  new branches to install it. The ``master`` branch changes quickly
  and may be unstable.

To ensure that the Singularity source code is downloaded to the
appropriate directory use these commands.

.. code-block:: none

    $ git clone https://github.com/hpcng/singularity.git && \
        cd singularity && \
        git checkout v{InstallationVersion}

Compile Singularity
===================

Singularity uses a custom build system called ``makeit``.  ``mconfig``
is called to generate a ``Makefile`` and then ``make`` is used to
compile and install.

To support the SIF image format, automated networking setup etc., and
older Linux distributions without user namespace support, Singularity
must be ``make install``ed as root or with ``sudo``, so it can install
the ``libexec/singularity/bin/starter-setuid`` binary with root
ownership and setuid permissions for privileged operations. If you
need to install as a normal user, or do not want to use setuid
functionality :ref:`see below <install-nonsetuid>`.

.. code-block:: none

    $ ./mconfig && \
        make -C ./builddir && \
        sudo make -C ./builddir install

By default Singularity will be installed in the ``/usr/local``
directory hierarchy. You can specify a custom directory with the
``--prefix`` option, to ``mconfig`` like so:

.. code-block:: none

    $ ./mconfig --prefix=/opt/singularity

This option can be useful if you want to install multiple versions of
Singularity, install a personal version of Singularity on a shared
system, or if you want to remove Singularity easily after installing
it.

For a full list of ``mconfig`` options, run ``mconfig --help``.  Here
are some of the most common options that you may need to use when
building Singularity from source.

- ``--sysconfdir``: Install read-only config files in sysconfdir.
  This option is important if you need the ``singularity.conf`` file
  or other configuration files in a custom location.

- ``--localstatedir``: Set the state directory where containers are
  mounted. This is a particularly important option for administrators
  installing Singularity on a shared file system.  The
  ``--localstatedir`` should be set to a directory that is present on
  each individual node.

- ``-b``: Build Singularity in a given directory. By default this is
  ``./builddir``.

.. _install-nonsetuid:


Unprivileged (non-setuid) Installation
======================================

If you need to install Singularity as a non-root user, or do not wish
to allow the use of a setuid root binary, you can configure
singularity with the ``--without-suid`` option to mconfig:

.. code-block:: none

    $ ./mconfig --without-suid --prefix=/home/dave/singularity && \
        make -C ./builddir && \
        make -C ./builddir install

If you have already installed Singularity you can disable the setuid
flow by setting the option ``allow setuid = no`` in
``etc/singularity/singularity.conf`` within your installation
directory.

When singularity does not use setuid all container execution will use
a user namespace. This requires support from your operating system
kernel, and imposes some limitations on functionality. You should
review the :ref:`requirements <userns-requirements>` and
:ref:`limitations <userns-limitations>` in the :ref:`user namespace
<userns>` section of this guide.

  
Source bash completion file
===========================

To enjoy bash shell completion with Singularity commands and options,
source the bash completion file:

.. code-block:: none

    $ . /usr/local/etc/bash_completion.d/singularity

Add this command to your `~/.bashrc` file so that bash completion
continues to work in new shells.  (Adjust the path if you
installed Singularity to a different location.)

.. _install-rpm:

------------------------
Build and install an RPM
------------------------

If you use RHEL, CentOS or SUSE, building and installing a Singularity
RPM allows your Singularity installation be more easily managed,
upgraded and removed. In Singularity >=v3.0.1 you can build an RPM
directly from the `release tarball
<https://github.com/hpcng/singularity/releases>`_.

.. note::

    Be sure to download the correct asset from the `GitHub releases
    page <https://github.com/hpcng/singularity/releases>`_.  It
    should be named `singularity-<version>.tar.gz`.

After installing the :ref:`dependencies <install-dependencies>` and
installing :ref:`Go <install-go>` as detailed above, you are ready to
download the tarball and build and install the RPM.

.. code-block:: none

    $ export VERSION={InstallationVersion} && # adjust this as necessary \
        wget https://github.com/hpcng/singularity/releases/download/v${VERSION}/singularity-${VERSION}.tar.gz && \
        rpmbuild -tb singularity-${VERSION}.tar.gz && \
        sudo rpm -ivh ~/rpmbuild/RPMS/x86_64/singularity-$VERSION-1.el7.x86_64.rpm && \
        rm -rf ~/rpmbuild singularity-$VERSION*.tar.gz

If you encounter a failed dependency error for golang but installed it
from source, build with this command:

.. code-block:: none

    rpmbuild -tb --nodeps singularity-${VERSION}.tar.gz


Options to ``mconfig`` can be passed using the familiar syntax to
``rpmbuild``.  For example, if you want to force the local state
directory to ``/mnt`` (instead of the default ``/var``) you can do the
following:

.. code-block:: none

    rpmbuild -tb --define='_localstatedir /mnt' singularity-$VERSION.tar.gz

.. note::

     It is very important to set the local state directory to a
     directory that physically exists on nodes within a cluster when
     installing Singularity in an HPC environment with a shared file
     system. 

Build an RPM from Git source
============================

Alternatively, to build an RPM from a branch of the Git repository you
can clone the repository, directly ``make`` an rpm, and use it to install
Singularity:

.. code-block:: none
   
  $ ./mconfig && \
  make -C builddir rpm && \
  sudo rpm -ivh ~/rpmbuild/RPMS/x86_64/singularity-{InstallationVersion}.el7.x86_64.rpm # or whatever version you built


To build an rpm with an alternative install prefix set ``RPMPREFIX``
on the make step, for example:

.. code-block:: none

  $ make -C builddir rpm RPMPREFIX=/usr/local

For finer control of the rpmbuild process you may wish to use ``make
dist`` to create a tarball that you can then build into an rpm with
``rpmbuild -tb`` as above.

.. _remove-an-old-version:

---------------------
Remove an old version
---------------------

In a standard installation of Singularity 3.0.1 and beyond (when
building from source), the command ``sudo make install`` lists all the
files as they are installed. You must remove all of these files and
directories to completely remove Singularity.

.. code-block:: none

    $ sudo rm -rf \
        /usr/local/libexec/singularity \
        /usr/local/var/singularity \
        /usr/local/etc/singularity \
        /usr/local/bin/singularity \
        /usr/local/bin/run-singularity \
        /usr/local/etc/bash_completion.d/singularity

If you anticipate needing to remove Singularity, it might be easier to
install it in a custom directory using the ``--prefix`` option to
``mconfig``.  In that case Singularity can be uninstalled simply by
deleting the parent directory. Or it may be useful to install
Singularity :ref:`using a package manager <install-rpm>` so that it
can be updated and/or uninstalled with ease in the future.

------------------------------------
Distribution packages of Singularity
------------------------------------

.. note::

    Packaged versions of Singularity in Linux distribution repos are
    maintained by community members. They may be older releases of
    Singularity, as it can take time to package and distribute new
    versions. For the latest upstream versions of Singularity it is
    recommended that you build from source using one of the methods
    detailed above.

Install the CentOS/RHEL package using yum
=========================================

The EPEL (Extra Packages for Enterprise Linux) repos contain
Singularity rpms that are regularly updated. To install Singularity
from the epel repos, first install the epel-release package and then
install Singularity.  For instance, on CentOS 6/7/8 do the following:

.. code-block:: none

    $ sudo yum update -y && \
        sudo yum install -y epel-release && \
        sudo yum update -y && \
        sudo yum install -y singularity

------------------------------------------
Testing & Checking the Build Configuration
------------------------------------------

After installation you can perform a basic test of Singularity
functionality by executing a simple container from the Sylabs Cloud
library:

.. code-block:: none

    $ singularity exec library://alpine cat /etc/alpine-release
    3.9.2


See the `user guide
<\{userdocbaseurl\}/\{userversion\}/>`__ for more
information about how to use Singularity.

singularity buildcfg
====================

Running ``singularity buildcfg`` will show the build configuration of
an installed version of Singularity, and lists the paths used by
Singularity. Use ``singularity buildcfg`` to confirm paths are set
correctly for your installation, and troubleshoot any 'not-found'
errors at runtime.

.. code-block:: none

    $ singularity buildcfg
    PACKAGE_NAME=singularity
    PACKAGE_VERSION={InstallationVersion}
    BUILDDIR=/home/dtrudg/Sylabs/Git/singularity/builddir
    PREFIX=/usr/local
    EXECPREFIX=/usr/local
    BINDIR=/usr/local/bin
    SBINDIR=/usr/local/sbin
    LIBEXECDIR=/usr/local/libexec
    DATAROOTDIR=/usr/local/share
    DATADIR=/usr/local/share
    SYSCONFDIR=/usr/local/etc
    SHAREDSTATEDIR=/usr/local/com
    LOCALSTATEDIR=/usr/local/var
    RUNSTATEDIR=/usr/local/var/run
    INCLUDEDIR=/usr/local/include
    DOCDIR=/usr/local/share/doc/singularity
    INFODIR=/usr/local/share/info
    LIBDIR=/usr/local/lib
    LOCALEDIR=/usr/local/share/locale
    MANDIR=/usr/local/share/man
    SINGULARITY_CONFDIR=/usr/local/etc/singularity
    SESSIONDIR=/usr/local/var/singularity/mnt/session

Note that the ``LOCALSTATEDIR`` and ``SESSIONDIR`` should be on local,
non-shared storage.

The list of files installed by a successful `setuid` installation of
Singularity can be found in the :ref:`appendix, installed files
section <installed-files>`.

Test Suite
==========

The Singularity codebase includes a test suite that is run during
development using CI services.

If you would like to run the test suite locally you can run the test
targets from the ``builddir`` directory in the source tree:

  - ``make check`` runs source code linting and dependency checks
  - ``make unit-test`` runs basic unit tests
  - ``make integration-test`` runs integration tests
  - ``make e2e-test`` runs end-to-end tests, which exercise a large
    number of operations by calling the singularity CLI with different
    execution profiles.

.. note::

    Running the full test suite requires a ``docker`` installation,
    and ``nc`` in order to test docker and instance/networking
    functionality.

    Singularity must be installed in order to run the full
    test suite, as it must run the CLI with setuid privilege for the 
    ``starter-suid`` binary.

.. warning::
   
    ``sudo`` privilege is required to run the full tests, and you
    should not run the tests on a production system. We recommend
    running the tests in an isolated development or build
    environment.
    
==============================
Installation on Windows or Mac
==============================

Linux container runtimes like Singularity cannot run natively on
Windows or Mac because of basic incompatibilities with the host
kernel. (Contrary to a popular misconception, MacOS does not run on a
Linux kernel. It runs on a kernel called Darwin originally forked
from BSD.)

For this reason, the Singularity community maintains a set of Vagrant
Boxes via `Vagrant Cloud <https://www.vagrantup.com/>`__, one of
`Hashicorp's <https://www.hashicorp.com/#open-source-tools>`_ open
source tools. The current versions can be found under the `sylabs
<https://app.vagrantup.com/sylabs>`_ organization.

Sylabs has also developed a beta version of Singularity Desktop for
Mac, which runs Singularity in a lightweight virtual machine, in a
transparent manner.

-------
Windows
-------

Install the following programs:

 -  `Git for Windows <https://git-for-windows.github.io/>`_
 -  `VirtualBox for Windows <https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads>`_
 -  `Vagrant for Windows <https://www.vagrantup.com/downloads.html>`_
 -  `Vagrant Manager for Windows <http://vagrantmanager.com/downloads/>`_

---
Mac
---

To use Singularity Desktop for macOS (Beta Preview):

Download a Mac installer package `here
<https://www.sylabs.io/singularity-desktop-macos/>`__.

Singularity is also available via Vagrant (installable with
`Homebrew <https://brew.sh>`_ or manually) or with the Singularity Desktop for
macOS (Alpha Preview).

To use Vagrant via Homebrew:

.. code-block:: none

    $ /usr/bin/ruby -e "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/master/install)"
    $ brew cask install virtualbox && \
        brew cask install vagrant && \
        brew cask install vagrant-manager

-----------------------        
Singularity Vagrant Box
-----------------------

Run Git Bash (Windows) or open a terminal (Mac) and create and enter a
directory to be used with your Vagrant VM.

.. code-block:: none

    $ mkdir vm-singularity && \
        cd vm-singularity

If you have already created and used this folder for another VM, you will need
to destroy the VM and delete the Vagrantfile.

.. code-block:: none

    $ vagrant destroy && \
        rm Vagrantfile

Then issue the following commands to bring up the Virtual Machine. (Substitute a
different value for the ``$VM`` variable if you like.)

.. code-block:: none

    $ export VM=sylabs/singularity-3.5-ubuntu-bionic64 && \
        vagrant init $VM && \
        vagrant up && \
        vagrant ssh

You can check the installed version of Singularity with the following:

.. code-block:: none

    vagrant@vagrant:~$ singularity version
    {InstallationVersion}


Of course, you can also start with a plain OS Vagrant box as a base and then
install Singularity using one of the above methods for Linux.
